W-16543184-runtime-http-handling-diagram-v4.3-kt (#3011)
mulesoft/docs-mule-runtime-3: modules/ROOT/pages/http-connection-handling.adoc

> = Understanding HTTP Connection Handling during Mule Runtime Shutdown

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= Understanding HTTP Connection Handling During Mule Runtime Shutdown
```

Mule runtime engine (Mule) manages HTTP connections during shutdown through a two-stage graceful shutdown process followed by a forceful termination. 

> This process first refuses new connections while allowing existing ones to complete with a `Connection: close` signal, then rejects new requests entirely while finishing in-flight processing, before finally forcefully terminating all remaining connections upon timeout. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The process first refuses new connections while allowing existing ones to complete with a `Connection: close` signal, then rejects new requests entirely while finishing in-flight processing, before finally forcefully terminating all remaining connections upon timeout. 
```
Just to start in a different why than in the next paragraph.

This supports seamless scale-down scenarios, enabling the reduction of Mule replicas while maintaining the stability and reliability of the application by progressively draining traffic.

== HTTP Connection Handling Diagram

> This diagram illustrates the behavior of HTTP connection handling during Mule shutdown:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This diagram shows how HTTP connection behaves during Mule shutdown:
```

image::runtime-http-connections-diagram.png[]

Phase 1: Mule Started

> * Mule State: Mule started and is running normally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Mule State: Mule has started and is running normally.
```

> * HTTP Behavior: All incoming HTTP traffic is routed to Mule and processed without any special handling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* HTTP Behavior: All incoming HTTP traffic routes to Mule and gets processed without any special handling.
```

Transition: Send Stop Signal to Mule 

* The shutdown sequence starts by sending a stop signal to the Mule instance.

Phase 2: HTTP Graceful Shutdown - Mule Stopping

* Trigger: Reception of the stop signal.

> * Duration: Up to the configured HTTP Graceful Timeout (default: 5 seconds). However, if all existing HTTP connections are closed before this timeout period elapses, the HTTP Graceful Shutdown phase will end early, and Mule won't wait for the full timeout duration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Duration: Up to the configured HTTP Graceful Timeout (default: 5 seconds). However, if all existing HTTP connections close before this timeout period elapses, the HTTP Graceful Shutdown phase ends early, and Mule doesn't wait for the full timeout duration.
```

* Mule State: Mule is initiating a shutdown or transitioning to stopped.
* HTTP Behavior:

** No new connections: The HTTP server stops accepting new incoming TCP connections (the acceptor socket is closed).

> ** Existing and In-Flight requests: Ongoing HTTP requests (both those already being processed  in-flight and those on existing, established connections) will continue to be handled normally. However, all responses will include the `Connection: close` header, signaling to the HTTP client to close the connection after the current request-response cycle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** Existing and In-Flight requests: Ongoing HTTP requests (both those already being processed in-flight and those on existing, established connections) continue to be handled normally. However, all responses include the `Connection: close` header, signaling to the HTTP client to close the connection after the current request-response cycle.
```

> ** Early termination: If there are no active HTTP connections when the stop signal is received, the HTTP Graceful Shutdown phase will end immediately, even before the timeout period expires.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** Early termination: If there are no active HTTP connections when the stop signal is received, the HTTP Graceful Shutdown phase ends immediately, even before the timeout period expires.
```

** Late-Arriving requests: If an HTTP request arrives just before the HTTP Graceful Timeout is reached, it'll still be processed normally, even if the processing extends beyond the HTTP Graceful Shutdown timeout.

Transition: HTTP Graceful Shutdown Timeout Elapsed 

* The configured duration for the HTTP Graceful Shutdown has ended.

Phase 3: Mule Graceful Shutdown - Mule Stopping

* Trigger: Expiration of the HTTP Graceful Shutdown Timeout.
* Duration: Up to the configured Mule Graceful Shutdown Timeout (default: 5 seconds).

> * Mule State: Mule is shutting down gracefully

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Mule State: Mule is shutting down gracefully.
```

* HTTP Behavior:

> ** Reject new requests (503): Any new HTTP requests arriving at the runtime will be immediately rejected with a 503 Service Unavailable error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** Reject new requests (503): Any new HTTP requests arriving at the runtime is immediately rejected with a 503 Service Unavailable error.
```

> ** Reject new Requests (404): Once the Mule app code unregisters the HTTP endpoint from the underlying HTTP server, subsequent new HTTP requests will receive a 404 Not Found error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** Reject new Requests (404): Once the Mule app unregisters the HTTP endpoint from the underlying HTTP server, subsequent new HTTP requests receive a 404 Not Found error.
```

> ** Complete In-Flight messages: HTTP requests that were already fully read and are being processed (in-flight messages) will be allowed to complete their execution normally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** Complete In-Flight messages: HTTP requests that were already fully read and are being processed (in-flight messages) complete their execution normally.
```

Transition: Mule Graceful Shutdown Timeout Elapsed 

* The configured duration for the overall Mule Graceful Shutdown has ended.

Phase 4: Mule Stopped 

* Trigger: Expiration of the Mule Graceful Shutdown Timeout.

> * Mule State: Mule stopped.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Mule State: Mule has stopped.
```

> * Behavior: The Mule process proceeds to a forceful shutdown and will eventually exit. As a result:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Behavior: The Mule process proceeds to a forceful shutdown and eventually exits. As a result:
```

> ** All remaining open HTTP connections will be abruptly closed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** All remaining open HTTP connections close abruptly.
```

** Clients connected to these forcibly closed connections will likely receive a connection reset error or a broken pipe error, depending on the TCP status of their socket at the time of closure.

== Configure Shutdown Timeout

> Note that while the HTTP Graceful Shutdown Timeout and the overall Mule Graceful Shutdown Timeout serve distinct purposes in the shutdown sequence, you configure them using the same `shutdownTimeout` parameter within the `<configuration>` element of your Mule application's XML file. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the HTTP Graceful Shutdown Timeout and the overall Mule Graceful Shutdown Timeout serve distinct purposes in the shutdown sequence, you configure them using the same `shutdownTimeout` parameter within the `<configuration>` element of your Mule app's XML file. 
```

Specify the value in milliseconds (default 5000 milliseconds), which controls the maximum duration for both graceful shutdown periods. For example:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<mule ...>
  <configuration shutdownTimeout="10000" /> </mule>
----

> For details, refer to xref:global-settings-configuration.adoc#global-configurations-reference[Global Configurations Reference]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For details, refer to xref:global-settings-configuration.adoc#global-configurations-reference[Global Configurations Reference].
```
